HARI SREENIVASAN: Now let's turn
to the extreme heat wave baking
the West and Southwest parts
of the country.
Temperatures are well
above the 100-degree mark.
In California, it was 127
degrees yesterday in Death
Valley, 122 in Palm Springs.
In Phoenix, the temperature
is expected to top out
at 118 degrees today.
In fact, it's been so hot
there, more than 40 flights
were canceled or delayed because
some planes can't safely
lift off in that heat.
A new analysis published in the
journal "Nature Climate Change"
this week also said climate
change is leading to more
heat waves in general.
It found that 30 percent of the
world's population is exposed
to potentially deadly heat for
20 days per year or more.
It's the subject of our weekly
segment on the Leading Edge
of science with Miles O'Brien.
Let's start with what's
happening in Phoenix.
Miles, you have flown
for a long time.
We have always heard of
flights being delayed
because it's too cold.
How can a flight not take
off because it's so hot?
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes, Hari, if
it weren't for the snow and
ice, the winter would be the
perfect time to fly, because
a wing achieves flight, it
derives lift based on the number
of air molecules
that surround it.
And, as the temperature heat
up, those molecules command.
We know that, when you
warm things up, things
expand generally.
So there are fewer
air molecules, so it
takes greater amount of
speed for that aircraft
to fly.
And if the runway isn't long
enough to support that -- in
other words, if the temperature
is so high that there are so
few molecules there to lift
the wing that you don't have
enough runway to get going
fast enough, you're grounded.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
so this is still smaller
planes that were affected.
What's the difference
with the bigger planes?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, the larger
planes, the Boeing 737s, the
big airliners, are designed
to operate in a wider range of
circumstances, for one thing.
They are kind of a global
product that has to operate in
all kinds of intense conditions.
And, frankly, it just
costs more to certify
them to these parameters.
In addition, a 737, for example,
has a lot more potential
payload, so you can take off
some cargo and still
fly the mission.
These smaller planes
are not designed with
as much versatility, and
because they're smaller,
they have less capability
to reduce the payload
and thus take off.
And really, ultimately, they
have charts in there that a
pilot has to look at, and there
will be a maximum temperature,
given the altitude of
the field, et cetera.
And if you exceed that, you
legally cannot take off.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There are
lots of runways that are too
short to deal with this kind
of heat.
And we talked about in Phoenix,
but, say, a place like La
Guardia is just as confined
or San Francisco is
just constrained by a
certain amount of space.
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes, so
researchers looked at this.
The La Guardia runway is about
7,000 feet, runways there.
And while that's about 20 feet
above sea level, and thus the
air is denser there, by virtue
of where it is and it doesn't
get quite as hot, nevertheless,
at that length, you still
- - there are still some
parameters and constraints
that we have to be
watching as the climate
gets warmer.
This goes into the larger
subject, Hari, of how our
civilization is designed.
When you're thinking about a
beach house on a barrier island
or a runway at La Guardia
or at Phoenix Sky Harbor,
we have a finely-tuned
civilization, and as
the temperature goes
up, even though it has only
gone up a degree Celsius over
a hundred years, it does create
pockets of these heat waves.
We're not exactly sure
why, probably because the
jet stream is weakening
and causing high-pressure
systems to park in these places.
I spoke with a climate
scientist who has looked
into this extensively.
He's at Columbia University --
Radley Horton is his name --
as part of a series I did for
the weather app MyRadar.
RADLEY HORTON, Columbia
University: If we look
at the last decade
or two, we are seeing
twice as many record-breaking
extreme heat events, cities
that are breaking their daily
record highs for a given day,
compared to the ratio compared
to the number of cities
having record-breaking
cold temperatures.
If you make temperatures just
a couple degrees warmer on the
hottest days, that means much
more demand for air
conditioning, for
example, which means much
greater risk of the power
going out, precisely at those
temperatures, those times when
people are so sensitive to
just a little more warming from
a public health perspective.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That goes a
bit to that Goldilocks effect
you are talking about, because
even our infrastructure and
our systems are built for us
to be within a certain range.
MILES O'BRIEN: Exactly.
And that's why we need
to be really watching the
effects of climate change.
It's easy to dismiss
a one-degree Celsius
increase and say, well,
that's not a big deal,
but, in isolated locations, in
specific locations, whether it's
Phoenix or whether it's Miami
Beach or whether it's another
city that has a sea level
problem that it is dealing with,
or whether it's California
dealing with wildfires,
those particular pockets,
those problems are
exacerbated by that
overall increase in the
temperature of the climate,
the overall temperature
of the planet.
And it causes changes to our
weather systems which we're
just beginning to understand.
Researchers are just
getting a handle on it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So in the
case of this news about Phoenix
and the air -- do airlines,
who think about buying planes
years and years out -- these are
hundreds of millions of dollars'
worth of purchases -- do they
think differently about what
kind of jets to buy or where to
park all those jets, in a
place with a long runway?
MILES O'BRIEN: Hari, I
think this is something
the aviation industry
has not gotten out ahead
of.
I suspect there are a lot of
conversations going right now
as we have seen this record
heat wave.
There was a similar record
heat wave last year as well
which caused similar problems.
So the airlines are going to
have to contend with this, the
airliner makers, and airports
as well.
The longest runway at Phoenix
Sky Harbor is a little
more than 11,000 feet.
They might have to think
about extending that runway.
What about La Guardia, though?
Is that even possible?
Is it possible to
even consider that?
All these things get factored
into the consequences
of climate change and
how we as civilization
can adapt to it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
science correspondent Miles
O'Brien, thanks so much.
MILES O'BRIEN: You're welcome.